Heat. Heat.
All right. Uh, let me go ahead and get started. Um, please do finish eating.
Um, that way I'm confident that you're getting something of value out of this out of this session. Um, my name is
Larry McCannernney. Uh let me tell you a little bit about why I'm here and what we're going to talk about and why I hope
I can be valuable for you. Uh I'm the head of the writing program here at the University of Chicago.
But what's probably more relevant to you is that I have a long-standing consulting practice not only with other
uh universities but with a lot of uh professional firms, businesses, NGO,
policy institutes etc. um who hire me to come to work with
people who are working for them that they have hired mostly out of places like the University of Chicago and they
hire me in a desperate attempt to
uh this is going to sound overdramatic to save your jobs. Um this is way
overdramatic but sometimes not. Um, I just had last month I had a uh for break
I had somebody from a professional firm come and spend a week with me here in Chicago because he was about to lose his job. Um, for writing issues. What is so
frustrating to everybody about this is that the writing issues involved are actually conceptually extremely simple.
They are so this is so much easier than the stuff you people study. What I do is
so easy. what you do is so hard that it frustrates everybody that people who are
the best in the world at this hard stuff have trouble with what's actually pretty
easy stuff. So what I'm here to talk to you about is two levels. One is sort of
a high level explaining why it is that people who are really really smart
like faculty at the University of Chicago students at the University of Chicago really smart people
why do they have trouble writing effectively just why is that writing doesn't seem to
be that hard all right give me a first
contribution why is it why do I have a Why do people who are really smart have
trouble writing? Well, not used to it.
That's beautiful. Say that. What do you mean? Can you elaborate a little bit? Uh because like most of our like things
we do is reading, right? Accumulating knowledge, right? But we don't express it that much often.
I want to I want to pull this a little more out. He says, "You're not used to writing." Well, I can't agree. This is
so important and I agree so much, but I want to push it in a way that you probably didn't even mean. I would be
willing to bet that over the course of your careers, you've done a lot of writing. You've been in school for how
many years? 16, 18, 20. It's a touchy subject.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. It's a touchy subject. Um, I walk around with a t-shirt.
Actually, I work out with a t-shirt that says graduate student because I'm still officially a graduate student at the University of Chicago. Well, actually,
I'm not. I would be if 20 15 years ago, they hadn't realized that they needed to
cut me off because I skew the data results. You know, they need to get people finishing. And when you've got
somebody who's been on the campus since 1977, then doesn't look good for the
statistics. very very sensitive subject of how long
we have been in school. Get it? You've done enormous amounts of writing though,
right? You've done enormous amounts of writing. Why hasn't that prepared you to write? Well,
serious question. You've done enormous amounts of writing in your life.
How is it possible that you can walk out of this campus and not write well?
required to write. I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna make it more extreme just to be controversial.
You haven't been required to write at all. Not what I this I'm obviously being
intentionally provocative, right? You haven't done any writing that's real
writing, any of it, I would claim.
The Big Picture
Um and that's the big that's the that's the big picture difficulty you have. Uh
today I want to talk a little bit about the big picture and then I'm going to talk about some very specific things so that we can spend some time working on
specific techniques specific literally I have exercises in this handout so that by the time you leave today you'll have
actually done some specific things that you can walk out tomorrow and do differently with your writing. But I
want to spend a moment on the big picture stuff. You've been writing and writing and
writing and writing and writing and writing and writing and writing and writing, but it's not real for a couple
of reasons. This is the one I'm going to be most um aggravating about.
When I work with uh writers of almost all sorts,
there's usually four characteristics of their writing that matter. They need their writing to be clear,
organized, persuasive. The bottom two are not very interesting little bit, but
the top one is valuable. When you leave as a student, whether
you're a professor or working outside the academy, the most important thing about your
writing is that it be valuable. And I would argue that not only have you ne
not learned how to do this, you've learned habits that work against your ability to make
your writing valuable. Why
a lot of the writing we do is jargony and more true press like either teachers or officers.
The jargony part I don't worry about. One of the things I should tell you is that I spend a lot of time sort of not
saying things that most people say. Most people say that if you're writing outside the academy, you shouldn't use
jargon. That's just demonstrabably false. It turns out there are certain ways that you use jargon that feel
valuable to the readers and certain ways you use it that destroys value. You need
to learn how to use it in the way that feel valuable. To say just don't use it, that's just crazy. I mean, it's it's
it's it's impossible. Um,
Text Based Writing
here's here's the approach that I take to writing that might be should
introduce at this moment. Most of you
have been taught things about writing that are what we call textbased. That is, somebody's given you advice about
what your text should look like. They say something like, "Don't use jargon."
Or they say something like, "Have a thesis sentence." Or they say something like, "Don't use passive verbs." All of
these are ridiculous things to say, but the point is, they make sense to you and they
shouldn't because they're rules about the text
itself. That is, they're rules about what a text
should look like. We think this is a fundamental misunderstanding of language.
Anytime somebody tells you a gives you advice about writing that's textbased, they say something like um keep your
sentences short. I hope from now on in the back of your head you say for which
readers and what purpose? Because we think no advice about writing
makes any sense unless you've clarified who's reading it and the function of the
text. And you don't think that way. Somebody says to you, "Here's a good advice about
writing. Don't have more than six sentences in a paragraph." You say, "Okay." And we want you to say, "That
doesn't make not that that's wrong. It doesn't make any sense because you haven't told me which readers and what
function. Here's what we teach.
Expert Writing
We teach our our specialty at the University of Chicago is what we call expert writing. That is we work with
people who are experts in the way they think about the world. I
work with biochemists, neurobiologists, anthropologists, historians, lawyers,
fill in the blank. They have one thing in common. They're experts in the way they think about the world. They deal
with very complicated information, lots of subtlety, lots of nuance, lots of sophistication, lots of complexity, and
they think at very high levels. They also write.
Now 99% of them write and think at the same time.
That is they use their writing process to help themselves to think.
You do this. While you're writing your stuff, you're still thinking of your ideas. To help yourself do your
thinking, you have to do your writing. you have to do this because the stuff you're thinking about is too damn
complicated to just do it in your head. You should know that in classical rhetoric that's an enormous mistake. I
was taught in a classical model that says there are two separate functions. There's the thinking process and there's
the writing process. As I constantly tell the story, I had a high school English teacher who said to me, Larry,
there's two process. There's thinking, there's writing. She said, you're not ready to write until you're done thinking.
Miss Johnson. And she said, "To enforce this, I'm going to make sure that when
you turn in every essay you turn into me, you're going to turn in the outline
that you use to do your thinking." This was not a problem. First, I wrote
the paper, then I wrote the outline because it was inconceivable to me that
you can just think and then do the writing. Well, most almost everybody's like me.
They think and right and right and think and think and right and right and think think and write and write and think. Okay,
this is a very good thing and you should make sure that nothing I do today interferes with this process because
this is how you do your best thinking. But in the real world, not in school, in
the real world, when you're done with this, you have you will have created a text. You will send that text to your
readers. And in the real world, not the world
you're in now, the function of that text
is to cause readers to change what they think about the world.
That's its job is to cause the readers to change what
they think about the world. And whether or not it's valuable depends
on whether or not the readers perceive that you have valuably changed what they
think or what they do or how they decide.
And I would be willing to bet that in your co your schooling years, you virtually never did that.
Was that what your writing was for as a student? When you wrote a paper,
did you fail the paper if you didn't change what the teacher thought about the world?
Was that the test? Was that how you got an A, B, C, D, or F?
I'm getting a lot of those like so many people saying maybe was it the test? Was
it? All right, let's make it. Let's start in high school. When you were writing in high school, were you
changing the way your teachers saw the world when you wrote those high school papers? How about college? Were you
changing the way your instructors saw the world when you wrote those college papers? I mean, every once in a while, I
have somebody say, "Well, yeah. I mean, I have professors tell me that my work was so valuable to them."
That was a lie. I mean, you know that. At least it was a lie in the sense of it didn't change
what they thought. You know how I know it was a lie because if you had changed what they
thought they should have published your paper.
Sometimes I have faculty say to me, "Oh my the students writing is very helpful to me." I say, "Oh yeah." They say, "Oh
yeah, I really do. I learn a lot." I say, "Oh yeah." I say, "Yeah." I say, "Then your student write reading your
student's stuff is part of your like your thinking process." Yeah. I say, "Okay, then how often do you go find
student papers to read when you don't have to?" And what's the answer? Never.
Right. All right. What made your writing valuable to them?
What created the value for them? Your writing didn't.
I? Pardon me. Ideas. No.
Here's what did Oh, I mean, I offend people with this, but let me tell you, here's what you did
Bad Habits
in school, and you're still doing it right now. You're writing a paper. I
don't know, a couple of pages, 10 pages, three pages. You're attaching a $100 bill to it and you're handing it to your
instructor and saying, "Hey, will you read this?" Sure thing.
You think that's not what's happening? Really? Seriously, do you think that's not what's happening?
This is what's happening. And people say, "Oh, it's so awful, Larry, that you talk about money."
Now, let's say you go outside being a student. I'm not just talking about beyond the academy. Let's say you want
to be a professor and you write an article. Is that what's going to happen? Whether
you're a professor or a consultant or in any other kind of real world operation, are you going to write something and
hand a hundred bucks to your readers to read it? He's nodding his head. Is that
what's going to happen? What's going to happen now? They don't have to read it.
Not only this, but it's more than that. What's going to happen? If you waste their time, they're
going to make You want to get paid, right?
Yes. No. Yeah. Do you forgive me? I won't pick on her. Do you want to get paid?
Anybody here want to get paid? Here's what you're saying now. You're saying here, you can read this, but you
got to pay me first. You can't read this until you pay me. Pay me.
And I have to tell you, you have 16, 18, 20 years of not doing that.
You've never written anything, I would argue, at all.
The problem is that doesn't just leave you neutral, that leaves you with terrible habits.
Why is it so hard for really smart people to write? Well, one of the reasons is they have 20 years of bad
habits. The habit was they weren't writing to people who were doing this.
What were they writing to? What are your teach What were your teachers doing when you sent them papers? Were they using
your papers to change the way they saw the world? What were they using your papers to do?
Very roughly put, you have learned to write in what Vickenstein would call a form of life in which your readers were
paid to care about you.
Your teachers read your stuff because they were paid to read it to find out about you.
Well, he's handed in this new thing. I'm going to read this. Why? Because somebody's paying me to assess him.
That's never going to happen again, right? Whether you're in the academy or not,
nobody else is ever going to be paid to care about you ever again.
But because you guys are so successful, you are the best people in the world at
student kind of writing. You're very good at it. Trouble is,
that's not what you need to do afterwards. After school,
as a director of the writing program here on campus, I often get asked about helping undergraduates make the
transition from high school to college. We help them. It's not very difficult. or I'm asked to help make under graduate
students make the transition from undergraduate to graduate school. We help them. It's not very difficult.
What is really difficult is the transition from being in school to being
out of school because this value issue suddenly dominates everything and you've
had 20 years of never having to deal with it. Never having to deal with it. So that's
the big picture hard part of it. Um, as I said, we're going to talk about some specifics, but those specifics in
my mind only make any sense inside this larger problem of what I've stealing
from Vickenstein called the form of life. You ended a different form of life. Language is a different activity.
It's a different language game from being in school to being out of school.
So, I don't want to talk, we'll talk about texts, but I only want to talk about it in terms of the language game
of readers who need you to make your text valuable to them in their reading
process because I'm claiming that's a different language game. All right, turn
to the first page of your handout and let's get started looking at some specifics.
So on the first page, I've given you three instances of a text that's either by Roger Meerson or partially by Roger
Marrison. Do you need a hand up? Anybody else need a handout?
Okay. Roger Myerson, whom some of you very well may know personally. I should say I
don't. Um, really interesting writer. Here's three examples of his writing.
One's from the Journal of Economic Theory. Number two is from the New York Times. And number three is from a
journal called Journal of uh Conflict Resolution. Do me a favor, take a minute and just scan these quickly. You don't
have to read them to figure out the content of it. Scan it and describe. Tell me some of the things that somebody
would say about the differences in the writing between these three cases. One
that's definitely inside the Academy, the Journal of Economic Theory. one that's definitely outside the Academy,
the New York Times, and one that's sort of in the middle, the Journal of Conflict Resolution. Take a quick look
right. Now, let's say somebody asks you the question, "How are these texts different?" And I hope now for the rest
of your life, you have a little voice in the back of your head that says, "Well, wait a minute. What? Let's talk about readers and function." But let's imagine
that you're not talking about that and they won't let you talk about that. They're just saying how are these texts
and texts different? Point to something that's different between them or that
people would point out as different. First one is very descriptive. Descriptive. All right. How so? Give me
an example of being descriptive. Yours like looks like terms like
expected action profile and the conditional probability and the hyper plane. So he explains that kind of
equation. Well, um, it's descriptive, but take contrast
that. Would you say that three is not descriptive? Or two, to put this in perspective,
imagine if President Obama named Democrats. Is he not is are they not describing there? Yeah, they're supposed to describe,
right? It's all right. So, give me some other things that people would say, well, this is obviously different between these. The readers are different.
The readers are different for sure. And we're going to talk about that. Actually, the readers are in many ways quite similar, but we'll talk about
that. But I want to imagine what somebody who's just trying to describe the text would say.
The frame of reference the second is something that anyone could relate to. Okay. So, we say something. Well, I'm
I've obviously scared you by saying want say, "Oh my god, the first one has equations in it." You know, oh my god,
that's obviously different. The first one has equations. The other ones don't use equations. Right? Just to be
textually simple. All right. Notice some other things textual about this that are
purely we don't talk about things like describing textual. The sentences in the second one are shorter.
The sentences are literally shorter. Just look look at the first paragraph of number two. See how many sentences there
are there. One, two, three, four. Has four sentences in it. How about the same
length in number one? How many sentences number one have? Two. How many sentences does number
three have? Three. All right. So, here's what here's
what somebody's going to tell you when you go out to work in a place that's not the academy. They're going to say, "Oh my god, use short sentences."
They will say that to you. Use short sentences. And they will point to this and say, "Look, these are shorter
sentences." They won't ask the question, why are they shorter sentences? What is it about
the readers that makes it shorter sentences? What do you think it is about the readers of the New York Times that makes it a good idea to use shorter
sentences there? It is a good idea to use shorter sentences in general in a New York Times
oped piece. Why? What do you suppose is true about the
readers of the New York Times oped piece? That makes sentence shorter sentences
probably a good idea. They don't have so much time to read.
What's the value to a reader of a New York Times op-ed piece? What makes it valuable to them
to get as much information in the shortest amount of time? Possibly, but that's probably not why
most people read New York Times op-ed pieces. People say that they say, "Oh, yes, I
it's like, you know, I read it I read it for the article. I read it for information." probably not circumstances when they read for example
in the train that it's easier to make sure the one thing is they they're probably they may not be sitting at their desk reading
it they're reading it on a train someplace in moving walking or something. So a shorter a longer
sentence is going to demand their attention for milliseconds longer that's actually kind of awkward and that kind
of but the other thing is why they're re what value do they get out of it oped is an opinion based piece a lot of
times people don't really know how to interpret um like what's going on in the Ukraine. So, they want to think about it
from different perspectives. So, and it's an interesting point, Ryan. What's the difference between reading an op-ed piece and reading a news hard news
piece? I mean, I would just go back to saying that one is purely uh supposed to
inform, whereas the other is supposed to present and what? Present and what?
Entertain. And if you think that's not the case, talk to the editors of the New York Times.
Why do people watch why do people watch television or listen
to radio that have people we we bemoan it all the time? Oh, why do people
listen to these demagoguic uh journalists who are just spouting their opinions? Why are they listening
to Rush Limbo and Rachel Maddo? Why don't they just get objective journalism? Well, why don't they
watch because it's more fun.
Come on. I have lots of colleagues who come to me, Roger's not one of them, trying to
get stuff published in the New York Times. And the first thing I say to them is the New York Times, I'm not going to publish this because nobody's going to
read it. And they say, but people are interested in this. Everybody's interested in the Ukraine right now.
Everybody's interested in this, but this is boring. And then what do you suppose they do?
They look at me and they say, "Well, I can't be responsible for the fact that people aren't rigorous in their
thinking." But but why why the short sentence entertaining more people?
Why do you think? Um because people are able to judge if
that contents are boring or not. Yeah. See, this is the mistake you're making because what I do for a living is
not think about the relationship between the writer and the world or the text and
the world. My job is to think about how readers read.
You're thinking about content. I'm thinking about closer to somebody
standing in a subway and the process that's actually going on in their cognitive processing to to do this. And
you know what happens when we read? We're using all kinds of cognitive processing to use this text to think
about the world. And what happens when you interfere with the cognitive process? When the text makes it hard to
do the process. What happens to readers when there's
something about the text that makes it interfering with the reading process?
What we suppose readers do? I can tell you what they do. The first thing is they slow down. The second thing is they
don't understand. The third thing is they get annoyed. And the fourth thing is they stop.
And I got all kinds of people in your position who say, "Well, that's not my responsibility. Isn't it their job to read?"
when they're teachers. You've been writing,
you've been writing ineffectively and your readers haven't put it down.
Why not? Because you were paying them to read it. When that stops happening, now your job
is to make sure that process is valuable for the reader all the time.
And you've never had to do that before. You've never had to make the reading process feel valuable for the readers as
they go. Now, in the first one, Roger Meerson can write a big long sentence which doesn't
feel valuable to the readers until they get to the end of the sentence. He writes a lot of sentences where the
value to the reader appears at the end of the sentence and he can take him three or four lines to get there. And
when he's writing in the Journal of Economic Theory, he can do that because his readers will get to the end of that
sentence. But when you're writing in the New York Times, you can't. They won't get there.
They won't get there. Does it mean you have to write short sentences in the New York Times? No. You can write very very
long sentences in the New York Times and be very successful, but you have to know how to make then parts of sentences feel
valuable to readers before they get to the end. You can't have the value sitting just at the end because they
won't get there. But doesn't that mean that you should always write short sentences? No. Sure.
No. Why not? It's a great question. It's a great question. There's several reasons for it.
[Music] One of them is
Stress position
that in English and it's true of lots of other languages too,
the end of a sentence has what we call a stress position. That is
ending of sentences have extra stress compared to the rest of the sentence.
Quite surprising to people who've been told the beginning of the sentence is where readers pay the most attention. It's not true. It's actually they pay
attention at the end of the sentence. All right. Well, this would say, well, then I should use lots of short
sentences. But think about it.
Let's say one version of it has six of these. Another version
has three.
Can you feel a difference? This one is saying to readers, "Hey readers, there's six really important things I want you
to notice in this passage." This one says, "Hey readers, there's three." Well, imagine if this goes on for
several pages. Pretty soon you say, "This is important. This is important. This is important. This is important.
This is important. This is important." And pretty soon nothing is important. What you know how to do when you command
longer English sentences is you know how to have smaller moments
of importance. Forgive me for for quoting a very long sentence but this is a famous sentence and it's it was given
in a speech but it shows what I mean here. Uh it's a last sentence of of Lincoln's second inaugural. with malice
toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right, as God gives us
to see the right. Let us strive on to finish the work we are in. To bind up
the nation's wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his
widow and orphan, to do all which shall achieve and cherish a just and lasting
peace among ourselves and with all nations.
Well, the end of that whole thing is peace among ourselves and with all nation. and he wants that to get the
most stress. But along the way, he's manipulated the sentence so that other
things have lesser sense, lesser stress building to that.
So, sorry that wasn't actually on the agenda. It's a great question. The point I'm trying to make is not that there's
all kinds of cool language techniques that you don't know and can learn. Wow, that's really not it. My point is, you
already know everything you need to know about English language technique, but you haven't been trained in how to think
about how to use that technique to create value. You know what you've been trained in?
You've been trained in how to use language to reveal what's in your mind
or how your what your abilities are. You've been trained to use language to
demonstrate to your teachers, here's what I know and here's what I can do.
And those are the habits you have. You know the techniques, I promise you.
It's a question of redeploying them to doing a different function to live in a
different language game afterwards.
Notice some other things about the text differences.
Text differences
Notice that not only in the second one, um the sentences are shorter. They don't
need to be shorter, but it's smart to make them shorter because you have to have higher language skills to make longer sentences valuable. Notice in the
second paragraph, the writers are doing something that some of you may have been told is again
is against the rule. You notice they start a sentence with because in the second paragraph, you ever been
told you shouldn't start a sentence with because? You notice in this in second line up at the bottom, they start a sentence with and. You ever been told
you shouldn't start sentence with and? How would you account for the fact that they do it? They start a sentence with
because, they start a sentence with and if you've been told, "Oh, you shouldn't do that. There's a rule against that."
And you just saw some very respectable people doing it.
Why don't people usually account for that? I see it because at the beginning of the
sentence, I know I'm gonna learn something. Oh, no. No. I It's a very good thing. It's a very good thing to do it. I'm
saying you've all been told that you shouldn't do this. Imagine you went back to the teacher who said, "You told me I
shouldn't do it, but look." What would that teacher say? Do you think
when the New York Times crazy the teacher says one of two things? One
is, "Oh, that's the New York Times. They don't follow the rules there." or
they do this thing like when you're important enough and powerful enough then you get to do it. I tell you both
of this is this is one of the things I'm getting at. You've been taught a whole lot of rules
about texts that are nonsense. There is no such rule that you should start a
sentence with because or you shouldn't start a sentence with and. There is no such rule that you shouldn't split
infinitives. There is no such rule that you shouldn't use passive verbs. go down the line almost no matter what you've
been told about writing is wrong as if they say a rule the big exception is
spelling keep spelling you know other than that
these are crazy people say I'm not I mean I'm being
hyperbolic but my mentor the guy who started the writing program at the University of Chicago in 1979 wrote a
wonderful article um for the journal of English teachers, college English
teachers. And he said, "All these rules your people are teaching, stop teaching them because they're not rules." They
said real grow when actual readers read text and think about the world, none of these rules make any difference. It's a
brilliant article, 15 page long. And in the last paragraph, he says, "Okay, did you get the joke?
this article has more than 100 errors in it. More than 100.
And he says to his readers, "How many did you notice while you were reading
errors?" And the answer was, "I didn't notice any of them because they're not errors." They didn't notice them because
they were actually reading a text to think about the world. But once they read that paragraph, what do you suppose they all did?
They got their red pens out. They went back to the beginning and said, "Oh, there's one. There's one. There's one. There's one." And one great sentence,
one sentence has seven errors in it. He and I I helped him with this. We had so much fun, you know, writing these
sentences. It has seven errors in it, including the fact that this the verb is the subject singular and the verb is
plural. Like a basic rule, right? Nobody noticed. There's no such rule.
For me, language is not rule following. It's controlling the reading process.
It's understanding how readers read when I was saying to you and there's lots of
times when a singular subject and a plural verb works better for readers.
All of these rules don't make sense to me because they're
not rules. They're techniques. Language is a technique for controlling a reader's reading process.
And if you're sitting there looking at your text, not thinking about readers, but thinking about rules, you're probably writing badly because you just
kind of got it wrong. I think what languages is for.
So if we looked at this stuff, the reason I gave you these passages is to say here's what people normally
say about shifting from the academy to not in the academy. They say you have to
do things like stop using equations. That's the jargon thing. They say stop using jargon. They say make your
sentences shorter. They say all kinds of things that have to do with textual
characteristics. I'm here to say none of that's actually
what's at stake. What's at stake and what is in fact the same about these
three texts is that they all create value for their readers.
Roger Myerson in all three of these instances is creating value for the
reading process. He's making it valuable for people to read it.
How? There's lots of techniques. I want to talk about one that goes to the next page.
Look at the beginnings. Now, this is the openings of these articles. Tell me what these have to common. I'm sorry, it's
page three on the U number enumeration. One, this paper develops some
fundamental mathematical tools for analyzing games with a very large number of players, such as the games played by
voters in a large election. Now, go to two. However, the current crisis over
Crimea finally ends, Ukraine will still be left with a crisis of its own politics.
Three, management consultants have many theories of leaderships. I'm going to go to the second sentence here. Leaders are
often glorified as visionary strategic planners who set the course with bold, insightful decisions. But Zenapon gives
us a different view. What do these things have in common?
There's a lot of differences between them. Can you see anything that they have in common?
Actually, I'll tell you what they have in common. You tell me how they're doing it. Each one of them is making the
reading valuable for the reader. How
sets up what the rest of the paper's going to be about. So, you know, whether it's valable. No, but thank God you said that.
No, I mean this is so this is so this is so important.
I know you said that but it's crucial.
You ever heard something? You said it tells what the paper will be about. Sorry about my handwriting. That's what you said. You ever hear advice like tell
them what you're going to tell them. Tell them tell them what you told them. This is not a source of value.
Why not imagine this? Can you imagine in a first
sentence telling you I'm going to this paper is going to be about X and for you to decide I don't care about X.
I don't care. It's of no value to me to care about to know anything about X.
Then what are you going to do?
People look at me like, "Oh my god." And they the first thought is, "You want me
to lie? You want me to cheat? you want me to use rhetoric or something to to
sell this stuff and they look at me like that's all wrong. That's all morally
wrong. It's kind of slimy. People say, "Shouldn't that be what writing is
about?" They say, "Isn't that what writing is?
Isn't writing to be about something?
Yes. No. Is that what you do in your papers? When you write a paper, do you describe
something? Is that what you do in a paper?
Is that what professional academics do?
Is that what professional academic papers do? Do they describe things? Is that their
function? No. You'll hear at least the next thing is they make arguments.
Well, they argue. So there'll be a difference which is
what the paper will argue.
Can you feel that those might be different? One says, "Here's what my paper will be about." Another says, "Here's what my
paper will argue." My paper will argue that, for example, my paper my paper will
argue that uh cultural constructions are dynamic
as opposed to saying this paper is about cultural constructions.
Those are different. phone. Pardon me. The second one sounds to me.
Okay. But is that what academics do? Do they persuade? Do they make
arguments? Professional academics in their published work.
Is that what they do? What do they do? What do 98% of academic
papers do? Have a question. Say again.
Have a question. That's better.
Can you see how different that is? The opening tells us what question the
paper will answer. Can you see a difference between these three?
Can you feel a difference between these three? What's the difference?
What's the difference? In some sense, this whole everything I do, my entire career is summed up,
that's why I would forgive me for jumping on this one thing, but everything I teach is summed up in these three.
Everything. The latter assumes there's a problem. So, we'll put numbers on them just so we
can talk about it. Make sure we're clear enough.
What's the difference? That's one way to put it. In your own words, describe the difference between these three.
One allows the reader to think. All right. I would say this way.
This one for sure makes room for the reader.
You know what would be even better than this one? What if this says it tells Whoops, I should say tell us tells you
what question you have
that the paper will answer. Now, do you see a difference? What about
this one? tells us what the paper will be about. There's no place for a reader there. The
reader has no role. The only pe person with a role here is
the writer. The writer is going to talk about the world.
The writer will talk about the world. Writing about the world
tells what the paper is about. See that there is no space for a
function for the reader here except one function which is the teacher's function which is show me what you know about
this thing. Show me how much you know about it and if you pay me I'll read it and I'll give
you my judgment about what you know. But there's no other value embedded in that
language. So, how is Roger Meerson shifting more
toward this? Roger doesn't just do this. Look at the
very first one. What does he say at the beginning that's not just here's what this is about?
Point me to a word in the first sentence that says this is not just about.
This is actually valuable.
How about that one? Tools. Tools. What's the difference between the word
tools and the word ideas? He says tools.
You can use tools. Tools implies purpose, use, and value.
Ideas does not. The word tools right there is extremely
important in conveying to a readers this has a function for you. You're going to
be able to use this. When was the last time you used the word tool in any of your writing? You would
have said ideas, concepts.
Roger Myerson's a very good writer. How about methods? methods. Not quite as
good as tools, but what's really good about this one isn't the first sentence. It's the next
one. In such games, it is unrealistic to
assume that every player knows all the other players in the game. Instead, a more realistic model should admit some
uncertainty about the number of players in the game. What's that sentence doing there?
Is it describing? You could say it's describing, but what is it describing?
Do they go from unrealistic to realistic? What's it describing? This is a trick question. What is it describing?
He says it is unrealistic to assume that every
players know all the other players in the game.
People that do that. Pardon me. There people that do that. There are people who do that. There are people who
assume exactly that. Who are these people?
Other evidence. His readers. You know what academic papers mostly do?
They look their readers in the eye and say, "I know what you think and you're wrong."
You know what Roger's just done in this sentence? He said, "Hey readers of the Journal of Economic Theory, I know what
you think and it's unrealistic," which is polite term for what?
You're wrong. Worse, you're generating bad ideas and models
because you're wrong in what you're assuming. You shouldn't assume it anymore. Stop assuming it. This is not,
as it were, about the world. This is about his readers. He's describing his readers. He's saying to them, "Hey
readers, this question you actually don't have, but you ought
to have." Can you see how that creates the value for his work? And it's, forgive me, but
it's not just a matter of interesting. Some people say, "Well, it's just it's more interesting if you're
confrontational." It's not just interesting. Believe me, there's a lot of people who don't like confrontation and they don't want to argue. But when
an academic's professional job is to be right about this stuff and somebody looks him in the eye and says, "Hey,
it's your job to be right about this." And you say, "Yeah, it is." And you're wrong. You have to listen.
It's like going to medical doctors and the med saying to medical doctors, "Hey, medical doctors, you're treating this disease with this drug, right?" Doctor
says, "Yes, stop. You're killing people. You got to pay attention to that
value. He's creating value. That's what he's doing for specific readers, right?
This notion, oh my god, people get told, okay, when you go outside the academy, you should write as though you're
writing to sixth graders. Oh my god. Don't.
You know who you have to write to? Your readers. And you know what? You have to know about them? what they value.
Do not write to sixth graders. Your job is not to reveal your head.
Your job is to change their heads. You need to know what they think and you
crucially need to know what they value.
So, we'll come back to the New York Times one. Go down to the third one.
Management consultants have many theories of leadership. Leaders are often glorified as strategic visionary
strategic planners who set the course with bold insightful decisions. But Zenapon gives us a different view. What's Roger doing there?
What's he doing there? What's the function of this opening? Do you think
speaking to readers who are management consultants? Maybe. Yeah. And what's he doing with these
people who are management consultants? Telling them that their theory is wrong. Right? He's looking them in the eye and
saying,"I know what you think. You think leaders are glorified as visionary strategic planners." And then what is
the significance of saying Zenapon gives a different view? It's a polite way of saying what
that I have a better idea. You're wrong. It's a polite way of saying you're
wrong. It's just a jargon. It's it's a code for you're wrong.
And why is he why does he open with talking about what management consultants think?
Why would he talk about them? Because they're the people who read the
journal of conflict resolution. See what I mean? This isn't determined by the world at all. This is determined
by his readers. This is being driven by his sense of his readers and how to create value for
them. Now, I should be clear. Outside the
academy, it's less common to say to your readers, "I know what you're thinking, and you're
wrong." Inside the academy, 95% of most academic writing does that. It says to
That's an exaggeration. 85% of academic writing does that. You say to your readers, I know what you're thinking,
you're wrong. You have, we have very polite ways of saying it. We have all this kind of coding language for it. But
that's what we mostly do outside the academy. It turns out problems value is
much more diff much more diverse. Sometimes you say to your readers, I know what you think and you're wrong. Sometimes you say to your readers, I
know what's valuable to you and I can do that. I know what you need and this text
can provide that. But you open with what they need, not here's what the text is
going to be about. Because if you open with here's what the text is going to be about, you run the risk of them saying I
don't care about that. because they may not see the value of that.
Professor, I'm reading the second paragraph. Yeah. And I'm trying to find the sentence,
right? Which says you are wrong, right? And I So what's the val how is he creating value in this one?
However, the current crisis over Crimea finally ends. Ukraine will be still left with a crisis of its own politics.
a crisis that Russia sees as a pretext to annex Crimea and would invite further intervention in Ukraine unless it is
immediately addressed. It means there's another crisis that we
have to think about even though we're thinking about a different Why does this create value? It's there's
a little bit by the way there is a little bit of it. I know what you think and you're wrong. Um
the the hint of that is here. The origin of the current emergency in fact lie in the failure of Ukraine's political
instit in institutions to accomplish two fundamental tasks. But that's that's really it's only faint and not
important. What's creating value for people? Why would people continue to read this? What would be the value in it
to them? Imagine if I wrote it this way. However,
this current situation in Crimea resolves,
Ukraine will still be left with a situation of its own,
a situation that involves Russia in its relationship to Crimea and would have
further implications for the Ukraine. 90% of the readers of it would put it
down. Why?
There's no sense of urgency in that. And why do words like crisis, crisis,
seized, Russia seizing, Russia seizes, right? Why does it create a sense of
urgency in our reading of it?
Are kind of active. Pardon me. Those words are kind of active. Yeah. But they're not just that. You're right.
You're absolutely right about that. We value
reading about bad stuff.
You laugh. You think you don't
look at the newspaper tomorrow. What's the headline going to be? Is it
going to be something good happened?
How about this headline in the newspaper? Yesterday, nothing changed.
How about this? Go to a movie the next time. You imagine walking into a movie
and imagine sitting down in a movie theater and having the first five minutes of the movie say, "See these
people? They're very content. They're fine. And for the next hour and
a half, they're going to stay fine. And we're going to show you the details
of their contentedness. You going to watch that movie?
You going to watch it?" No. Why not?
Is it not true? Do you not want to understand people?
How come people don't want to watch it? How come you don't want to watch it?
It's not entertaining. You want people to read your oped pieces in the New York Times. better entertain
them. That's the case. That's just the case.
Turns out there's lots of different ways to entertain people, but the most obvious one is to say, "Oh my god. Oh my
god. Oh my god. Something's wrong. Oh my god." That's what draws our attention. That's
what we value when we read. Now, is that a bad thing?
I don't know. Maybe. Maybe it is. But it's the truth. People
when they're looking for entertainment are drawn to conflict, tension, trouble,
and we find it entertaining. Roger Meerson understands that
he doesn't begin this by saying this will be an op-ed piece about the Ukraine and will contain suggestions for future
policy in Ukraine. Because if he wrote that sentence, nobody would read the second sentence. Not nobody but very few
people in his audience would read the second sentence. So such a breaking news like airplane
clash like so in your sense I mean in your uh lecture would it be valuable in
terms of in the context of New York Times breaking news airplane crash. Have you ever heard breaking news airplane landed
safely? Right. We are drawn the New York Times is a
mass media. It has to have lots and lots of people looking at it. But the crucial point I'm trying to make is that the one
of the crucial values we get from the New York Times is actually entertainment or at least distraction.
So we want to be distracted. We pick up the New York Times. We want to be distracted. Do we want to get information?
Well, the people who read the New York Times want to feel better than the people who read USA Today. They want to
feel better about themselves. This is true. Right now, are they better? I leave that to you to judge. But I
promise you, they want to feel better about it. This sounds to people like I'm being
corrosively cynical. And I have to say, I don't think so.
I deal with language as a relationship among people. You guys have been taught to deal with language as a way of
revealing what you think. And I think you're just
wrong. Language is social. It's actually a relationship between you and other
people. So for me, when I'm going to talk about language, I need to talk about the other people, not just about
you because there's other people to me always in the equation.
So the first thing I want to talk about today and we're basically done now is
one of the things when you're writing either inside the academy or outside the academy, you need to look at the
patterns of your writing where what you're doing is just demonstrating, demonstrating, demonstrating. Say, I know this. I know this. I know this. I
know this. Here's how I know it. Here's my method of thinking. Here's this. Just turn that off and be thinking from the
first sentence of the reader's value. What's making it valuable for them? Why
are they reading it? They're not getting paid to read it. Therefore, from the first sentence, you've got to be
describing not what you think, but what they think, how they engage this. And
you've not been taught you've been taught to do the opposite of that. Now, here's a here's a small technique for
doing that that I promised I'd not just be at the at the realm of the ethereal,
but would be specific. Turn all the way up to page [Applause]
um I'm going to skip a bunch of pages. Turn up to page um
well let's pause at page eight and then I'm going to move on to something else.
Here's a classic mistake one a by a this happens to be a lawyer but a lawyer is a
you know well-trained academic um who's trying to write to a client. We
won't go through the whole thing but this is the opening sentence. The following discussion outlines obligations concerning payments of
overtime to the federal fair labor standards act in the applicable relations. Forgive me for once again for
coming back to the tell the what the paper's about but that's what the writer thought he was doing. It happened to be
a he. He said I'm telling the client what this is about. This is about obligations concerning payments of
overtime under federal Fair Labor Standards Act. Now, the comparison might be unfair, but look at the first
sentence of the second one, 1B. Dear client, you've asked whether the new federal wage and hours laws will affect
your obligation to pay overtime and provide compensatory time to your employees. Can you see the difference?
It's shocking, right? It's just shocking.
Now, sometimes people who write 1A say, "But doesn't the client know that they wrote they asked that question?" Well,
what do you think about that? The lawyer who writes 1 A says to me,
"But the client knows what question they asked." They might have forgotten. Well, they might have forgotten. And and
that makes in sense in this sense. I mean, client sitting at the desk reading text after text after text after text,
picks this one up and doesn't remember necessarily what this one was about. But there's a way bigger issue here. Do you
know how many texts clients have read from lawyers that were useless?
Utterly, completely useless. And the client paid for the privilege of reading it.
And it was useless for them. So, here's another message I have for you. Your readers do not trust you.
They don't trust you. They think you're going to waste their time. They think you're going to create stuff that's not
valuable for them. They do not trust you. And you've spent 20 years with
readers who trusted you. You spent 20 years writing to readers who are going
to read everything you wrote. And you've gotten used to the idea that you're whatever you write, your reader just
going to read. I can't tell you how wrong that is. And I even philosophically I think it's a gigantic
mistake. Language is a relationship between people. and you think about them. I would argue
from the beginning 1B signals to the reader that from the beginning I have
you in mind and this is about what's going to be valuable for you.
So let me give you a more subtle example of that. If you turn to page turn to
page nine for a moment.
Top of page nine let's just we'll just use the first two sentences. The dog chased the cat and the cat was chased by the dog. And I apologize to anybody
who's heard me talk about this. I use these sentences a lot. Which of those sentences is more clear and concise? The
dog chased the cat or the cat was chased by the dog.
One. No. It depends. And this is I'm going back to where I opened with. When you try to
make a decision about any piece of writing, your first question should be what? Who the writer cares about? who's
reading it. Most of you would think the first sentence is more concise because you've
been taught formal rules. Two two rules would you would come into play, right? You'd say, "What about
sentence one versus sentence two? It's shorter." And some of you have been taught you should use active verbs and not passive verbs. Daylight nonsense.
Clear nonsense. It is absurd to say that one is more clear or more concise than
two. What about the readers? Does it depends on readers? And what about the readers? Does it depend on?
Say again. If they care about the cat or the dog. If they care about the cat or if they care about the dog.
Why would that make any difference? Both. You're right. She's absolutely right. But other people would say, "What difference does that make? One sentence
is still shorter. It makes it more concise." They're wrong. Why?
Because the way English works, the subject of the sentence is what we call the focus of the sentence. It's what the
sentence is about. The first sentence is about what? The dog. The second sentence is about what?
The cat. What if the reader wants to think about the cat?
And they read the first sentence, the dog chased the cat. Why is that not concise for them?
They want to think about the cat. I'm thinking about the cat. The cat. The cat. The cat. That's what I care about. That's what I value. I want to think about the cat. And I read a sentence
about a dog. What do I have to do cognitively?
How do you flip the cat? I have to flip it. I have to process it twice. First, I process it as a sentence
about a dog. And I don't care about the dog. So, I have to process a sentence again, making it into a sentence that's
something I care about. It takes me longer to read it and understand it. And to us, that's what concision is.
Concision isn't the number of words on the page. It's how long it takes readers to process what's on the page. See what
I mean? You got to put readers in the equation all the time. But didn't you also say the stress of a
sentence happens at the end? Ah, this is great. So, here's how English works.
It has this is an over vast oversimplification, but it works like this.
There's a focus of the sentence and then there's a stress position in the sentence. The focus is invisible to us
but hugely important. It tells us what the sentence is about. Then we process
everything else in the sentence in terms of that focus. So in the first one, the dog chased the cat. We take all the
chasing in the cat and we refer it back to the dog. And then we think, I don't care about the dog. So we have to process it into being focused on the
cat. But this focus position once we get it, we actually then don't attend to it.
It's not visible to us. What's more visible to us is what comes in the end of the sentence, which is what we call
in a stress position. So your point's really beautifully taken. It turns out these two parts of a sentence have very
different functions for readers. Your job is, of course, to control both parts
for readers. And um if you're curious about how this works, um well, let me
give you an example real quick of how to do it. Turn now to page um
turn up to page uh 11.
I'm going to read this out loud. I'd like you to just underline the subjects of the sentences because in English,
four times out of five, there's plenty of exceptions, but four times out of five, the focus is just the subject of
the sentence. The subject is just what the sentence is about. So, for example, in recent years,
several attempts have been made to discover an overall structural pattern in the book of Amos. What's the subject of that sentence? Anybody? Several
attempts. Underline several attempts. Everybody on the same page with me, right? underline several attempts that's
the subject certainly inspired by the burgeoning interest in literary approaches to the
Bible these studies have divided Amos into relatively small number of extended sections underline these studies that's
the subject of that sentence a comparison of these studies however soon reveals considerable diversity
among them comparison of the studies is the subject underlined that thus to look no further than the authors mentioned in
footnote one the following divergent analyses of chapter 3 to six have been proposed underline in the following
divergent analyses. Only one more paragraph. The only points these scholars are all agreed on are
that 51 begins a new section, although I shall argue below that it does not. And 614 closes a section which has long been
recognized. So we have the only points these scholars are all agreed on. All that is the subject of the sentence are.
Two things to note. First, can you see how the writer is constructing a problem? Can you see how he's looking at
his reader's eyes and saying you're wrong? Do you see the language where he's doing that? Several attempts have been made to
discover an overall structure, certainly inspired by interest in literary approaches, each of which in
parenthesis, it is claimed. Can you see the force of that? It is claimed. What does that mean? That means it's wrong.
And then he says, "A comparison of these studies, however, soon reveals considerable diversity among them." What
he's doing is he's looking into his reader's eyes and saying, "I know what you think about the book of Amos, and
you're wrong." But now, turn to the next page.
Now, I'd like you to underline the subjects as I go through here. Does the book of Amos have an overall
structural pattern? How should such a pattern be characterized? How does its presence or absence shape the text? So
the subjects were the book of Amos, such a pattern, its presence or absence.
Recently the book of Amos has been considered to be divided into blah blah blah blah. The subject was the book of
Amos. Keep underlining. The sections in their inter relations then reveal an essential structure.
Underline the sections in their inter relations. However, the nature or even the
existence of an overall pattern is not clear. The subject is the nature or even the existence of an overall pattern. All
that's a subject. Next sentence. The book has been divided according to quite different schemes. The book is the
subject. We're going to do one more one C. Same thing. I want you to go through
and underline the subjects. Does the book of Amos have an overall structural pattern? Subject was book of
Amos. How should we characterize such a pattern? Subject was we. How is our
interpretation of the text shaped by such a pattern? Subject was our interpretation of the text. In the past
decades, our readings of sculptural scriptural texts have come to be increasingly influenced by literary approach of the Bible. Subject was our
readings of scriptural texts. In the case of the book of Amos, we've been made aware that the text is divided. Subject was
we. Last sentence, we have come to see a unity and connectedness in the book that was previously neglected. Subject was
we. Next one. But is what we see really there? Subject was we. So we got three
different versions of this paragraph, this opening. Which one's best?
No. God. Which one's best? No.
I apparently have failed in my gold today. I said from now on when anybody asks you
about a text you should say what who's reading it and what its function.
You were trying to answer the question without knowing who the readers were.
Some readers would prefer one. Some readers would prefer two, some readers would prefer three.
Depends on what they want to focus on in their thinking. The first one is focused
on what? What's the first one focused on?
Look at those subjects. What are those subjects referring to? Studies of the
book of Amos. Number two, what's that focused on? The book of Amos. What's three focused
on? readers of the book of Amos. See the difference?
Sometimes people pay me stupid amounts of money to fly to often wonderful
cities, walk in and sit down with them and make them take their pen out and underline
the subjects of their sentences because they're saying to me, "My readers don't find this valuable or I
can't get this published or I can't get promoted or I can't get whatever." and we sit down and we take out a pencil and we underline the subject of their
sentences and I can say do your readers care about this and they say no
say okay we can fix this we're going to figure out what your readers care about
what they want to focus on and we're going to put that in the subject position
why do smart people not know this you are all very smart people I'll end again
because you've been trained to think that your writing is about showing what you think and what you care about
because in school that's what its function was. And the hardest transition I know of is to stop your habits of
thinking of writing as revealing yourself. That's not going to happen anymore.
Okay. I'm sorry I've held you late. Um, good luck guys. At the end of this handout, you'll see some exercises that
I encourage you to do in terms of rewriting some sentences, but also um
one of the joys of being director of the writing program at the University of Chicago is that anybody on this campus can send me an email, make an
appointment, we sit down and look at their work. So, if any of this stuff or for any other reason you want to talk
about writing, send me an email. Uh we'll make an appointment and we'll sit down and talk about it.